+++ 
draft = false
date = 2018-09-14T00:00:00-06:00
title = "Object Oriented Programming and Golang"
slug = "object-oriented-programming-and-golang"
tags = ["golang", "oops", "programming"]
categories = ["Golang"]
+++

Go has picked some good concepts from different kind of programming languages like procedural, functional and object-oriented programming language and combined them together to create a unique flavor programming language.

Go isn’t an object-oriented language like C++, Java, C# etc. but it supports some of the OOPs concepts like Encapsulation, Type Methods, Composition etc.

In this blog post, we will see how can we implement those concepts in Go

## Type Methods

Go does not have classes but it has `types`. Structs are user-defined types in Go. Structs with methods serve the same purpose as classes in other programming languages.

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

//Person struct to store person information
type Person struct {
	FirstName string
	LastName  string
}

func (p Person) getFullName() string {
	return p.FirstName + " " + p.LastName
}

func main() {
	p := Person{FirstName: "John", LastName: "Doe"}
	fmt.Printf("%s\n", p.getFullName())
}
```

## Encapsulation
Go support encapsulation at the `package` level. Any `struct`, `variable`, `interface`, `type`, `function` etc. whose name starts with a small letter is `private` to that `package` and anything that starts with a capital letter is `public` and can be used in other packages.

## Composition
Composition is an act of including one structure into another which is sometimes called as trait or mixin in other languages. Go does not support inheritance but it provides implicit composition using the `struct`. Composition over inheritance is an old battle and Go is the first language that takes a firm stand on that.

The `Student` struct will have a field of the type `Person`. Because we didn’t give it an explicit field name, we can implicitly access the fields and functions of `Person` type.

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

//Person struct to store person information
type Person struct {
	FirstName string
	LastName  string
}

func (p Person) getFullName() string {
	return p.FirstName + " " + p.LastName
}

//Student struct to represent student
type Student struct {
	Person     //A `Person` type field without any name
	University string
}

func main() {
	p := Person{FirstName: "John", LastName: "Doe"}
	s := Student{Person: p, University: "Stanford"}
	fmt.Printf("First Name: %s\n", s.FirstName)
	fmt.Printf("Last Name: %s\n", s.LastName)
	fmt.Printf("Full Name: %s\n", s.getFullName())
}
```

## Overloading
Simply, Go does not support overloading. We can not have more than one methods functions with same name and different argument or return type. For this reason, you may end up writing different functions like `GetByID`, `GetByName` etc.

However, because of implicit composition, we can “overwrite” the methods of composed types.

For example, `Student` struct can have its own `introduce` method. We can always access the composed method like `s.p.introduce()`.

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
)

//Person struct to represent a person
type Person struct {
	FirstName string
	LastName  string
}

func (p Person) getFullName() string {
	return p.FirstName + " " + p.LastName
}

func (p Person) introduce() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("Hi !! My name is %s %s.", p.FirstName, p.LastName)
}

//Student struct to represent a student
type Student struct {
	Person     //A `Person` type field without any name
	University string
}

func (s Student) introduce() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("Hi !! My name is %s %s. I am student at %s.", s.FirstName, s.LastName, s.University)
}

func main() {
	p := Person{FirstName: "John", LastName: "Doe"}
	s := Student{Person: p, University: "Stanford"}
	fmt.Printf("Student Introduction: %s\n", s.introduce())
	fmt.Printf("Person Introduction: %s\n", s.Person.introduce())
}
```

Go isn’t an object-oriented programming language like C++, Java, C# etc. It does not have `object` and neither `inheritance`. It also does not support other important object-oriented concepts like `polymorphism` and `overloading`.

It does have `struct` which are similar to `class`. We can write type methods for `struct`. It also supports `encapsulation` at the package level. Go prefers `composition` over `inheritance`.

